Online Bond Trading Is Gaining, Despite the Bumps, June 22, 2003 


      NYTimes.com > Business > Your Money 

             Online Bond Trading Is Gaining, Despite the Bumps
            By HOWARD ISENSTEIN


            ESEARCHING and trading stocks online became common in the long bull 
            market. During the bond rally of the last three years, a small group 
            of do-it-yourself investors has begun to assemble portfolios of 
            bonds bought online. 
            Online bond trading remains cumbersome, partly because information 
            about bonds is harder to find on the Internet than data about 
            stocks. And unless investors restrict their online purchases to 
            Treasury and Ginnie Mae issues, which are backed by the government, 
            they will need to devote a lot of time to monitoring their 
            portfolios, many advisers caution. 
            
		Numbers for the entire industry are not available, but Charles 
            Schwab & Company, the big discount broker, says its clients now 
            average 10,000 online bond trades a month, up from 1,000 in August 
            2000, when it began to offer the service. By contrast, Schwab 
            clients made 143,990 trades of stocks or mutual funds online on an 
            average day in March, the company said. 
            Other companies offering bonds online include the E*Trade Group, 
            Fidelity Investments, TD Waterhouse and Vanguard Brokerage Services. 
            Investors can also turn to TreasuryDirect.gov to buy newly issued 
            Treasury bills, notes and savings bonds from the government, and to 
            www.internotes.com, owned by Incapital, and www.direct-notes.com, a 
            unit of LaSalle Funding, to buy newly issued corporate bonds.
            Brokerage firms began offering online bond trading as an outgrowth 
            of online trading over the last four years among dealers and large 
            institutional investors.
            The shift toward electronic trading platforms has allowed individual 
            investors to see thousands of prices in a more timely way, said Sang 
            Lee, an analyst at Celent Communications, a financial services 
            industry consulting firm based in Boston.
            "There is a lot more transparency," he said.
            Still, Web pages for bonds are more difficult to navigate than those 
            devoted to stocks, partly because the bond sites are relatively new 
            and not yet fully refined, and partly because of the nature of 
            bonds. Unlike stocks, bonds do not have ticker symbols. To find 
            bonds, search engines use the name of the issuer as well as the 
            bond's maturity, coupon, rating and other criteria. 
            At some sites, not all bond trades can be made online. At Vanguard's 
            site, for example, customers can research corporate bonds online but 
            must call to execute an order; Treasury issues, however, may be 
            bought online. 
            Investors who buy in bulk can get better yields. For example, at 
            1:30 p.m. on Friday an investor on Schwab.com seeking to buy just 
            one AAA-rated bond from GE Capital, due on Jan. 19, 2010, with a 
            coupon of 7.375 percent, would receive a yield to maturity of 2.689 
            percent; someone buying 20 bonds would get a yield to maturity of 
            3.427 percent. Bond prices move inversely to their yield; a bond 
            generally has a face value of $1,000.
            Quoted yields reflect a small markup by the broker. Some firms also 
            charge explicit commissions. In looking for the best deal, investors 
            should calculate the yield after commissions are taken into account.
             
            A PRUDENT way to invest in individual bonds is through a strategy 
            called laddering, said John Ladensack, executive vice president for 
            fixed income at Schwab in Jersey City. To start building a laddered 
            portfolio, an investor buys a collection of bonds with different 
            maturities spread over a given time frame. For instance, in a 
            five-year laddered portfolio, an investor buys bonds that mature in 
            one, two, three, four and five years. When the first bond matures in 
            a year, the investor reinvests in one that matures in five years, 
            maintaining the ladder. By doing so, the investor seeks to diversify 
            risk over time while keeping income relatively stable.
            To minimize risk, most people who want to assemble bond portfolios 
            on their own should stick to Treasuries or to securities issued by 
            Ginnie Mae, said both Mr. Ladensack and Guy M. Cumbie, a certified 
            financial planner and principal of Cumbie Advisory Services in Fort 
            Worth. Ginnie Mae, the Government National Mortgage Association, 
            offers government backing for its bonds.
            Mr. Cumbie suggests that investors need at least $50,000 to buy 
            enough bonds, from different issuers and with different maturities, 
            to achieve enough diversification. Schwab research, however, 
            suggests that an investor can get enough diversification with 8 to 
            10 bonds, so investors can start with as little as $10,000, Mr. 
            Ladensack said. 
            An investor buying Treasury or Ginnie Mae issues can get decent 
            prices even when buying so few bonds, but those interested in 
            municipal bonds should have at least $50,000, because prices of 
            municipal bonds are not as competitive, Mr. Ladensack said.
            Still, buying individual bonds may not make sense for all investors, 
            Mr. Cumbie said. Such purchases can be useful if an investor wants 
            to lock in a specific amount of income over a particular period, or 
            is seeking a set amount of money at a certain time for a specific 
            objective, like paying for a child's education, he said. But 
            investors seeking the highest total return — interest income and 
            capital gains from buying and selling bonds — should probably invest 
            in a bond mutual fund or a managed portfolio of bonds because 
            monitoring a bond portfolio "certainly requires more competence or a 
            heck of a lot more energy" than many people have, Mr. Cumbie said.
            Mark Kiesel, an executive vice president of the Pacific Investment 
            Management Company and a senior member of its investment strategy 
            and portfolio management group, cautioned individual investors to be 
            very careful if they want to buy bonds.
            "The benefit of mutual funds is that you're buying a manager's 
            expertise," Mr. Kiesel said. "You need an active manager" to buy and 
            sell different maturities and classes of bonds over time, based on 
            the changing economic environment, he said. 
            Mr. Ladensack said people shouldn't trade bonds online in hopes of 
            making a quick killing.
            "You don't buy bonds to get rich, you buy bonds to stay rich," he 
            said. 
            


                  TOP NYTIMES.COM ARTICLES


             Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company | Home | Privacy Policy | 
            Search | Corrections | Help | Back to Top 






