Stock Option Tax Shelters Are Challenged, New York Times, July 1, 2003 

  
      NYTimes.com > Business 



             Stock Option Tax Shelters Are Challenged
            By REUTERS


            Filed at 4:55 p.m. ET
            WASHINGTON (Reuters) - The Treasury Department and the Internal 
            Revenue Service on Tuesday moved to crack down on tax shelters using 
            stock options, a popular way for company CEOs to pad their 
            compensation.
            The IRS said it will challenge the arrangements and place them on 
            its list of abusive tax shelter transactions.
            ``The notice and the regulations eliminate any question that the 
            arrangements can be used to defer stock option gains,'' said Pam 
            Olson, Treasury's assistant secretary for tax policy, in a 
	    statement.
          

            ``Executives cannot defer income taxes on stock option exercise by 
            purporting to sell their stock options to a family member or family 
            limited partnership.''
            Stock options are one way that companies reward their CEOs without 
            having to pony up additional cash. Options allow CEOs to buy company 
            stock, usually at a price below market value.
            The problem comes when CEOs are able to exercise the options and 
            seek to protect the gains from the difference between the option 
            price and the stock price. Under the transaction Treasury sought to 
            prohibit Tuesday, the CEO transfers the options to a family member 
            or a family limited partnership in return for a 20- or 30-year 
            unsecured loan. The partnership can exercise the option and the CEO 
            can say he does not have to pay taxes until payments are made on the 
            note.

            Treasury said the option gains now will be attributed to the option 
            owner instead of the partnership and the transaction will no longer 
            meet the ``arm's length'' requirement for favorable tax treatment.
            Two high-profile CEOs have been linked with attempts to defer taxes 
            on their stock options recently. Dennis Kozlowski, CEO of Tyco 
            International Ltd. and William Esrey, former Chairman of Sprint 
            Corp., both reportedly used complicated stock option transactions to 
            ease their tax bills. Esrey ended up resigning after the arrangement 
            came to light. Kozlowski faces criminal charges for allegations of 
            unauthorized compensation and fraudulent stock sales unrelated to 
            the transaction. He has pleaded not guilty.
            Treasury spokeswoman Tara Bradshaw did not say how prevalent the 
            practice is, but said it has been actively marketed by tax shelter 
            promoters. The IRS has been looking into it over the past two years, 
            she added. 




             Copyright 2003 Reuters Ltd. | Home | Privacy Policy | Search | 
            Corrections | Help | Back to Top 





